IN 1989 the thin-hulled Exxon Valdez supertanker ran aground in Prince William Sound, Alaska, pouring a quarter of a million barrels of oil into the surrounding waters. At the time, it was America’s worst offshore spill, and a huge blow to the reputation of the ship’s owner, Exxon. The firm paid $3bn to clean up the area and settle legal claims, and to improve safety the American government ordered the phasing out of single-hull ships such as Exxon Valdez. All vessels used worldwide by Exxon’s corporate descendant, ExxonMobil, are now double-hulled. But that is not all. The disaster gave rise to a cultlike culture of discipline within ExxonMobil that helped turn it into the profitmaking beast it is today.

Three decades later, as a result of a relentless surge in cybercrime, digital firms are floundering towards their own Exxon Valdez moment. The latest is Capital One, a big American bank with a market capitalisation of $42bn, which on July 29th revealed that a hacker had stolen personal and financial details of 106m credit-card customers and applicants. Prosecutors allege that over four months Paige Thompson, a 33-year-old software developer, infiltrated a Capital One server hosted on Amazon’s cloud-computing platform through a misconfigured firewall. Bizarrely, the bank did not notice even after the hacker pseudonymously boasted about the heist on social media—until it was tipped off. For a company hitherto seen as one of the most technologically adept in finance, this is a blow.

The incident has two parallels with the oil industry. Robert Knake, a former White House cyber-security adviser and co-author of “The Fifth Domain”, a new book on the subject, describes the way the hacker penetrated a layer of security called a web-application firewall as a “perfect analogy” to the era of single-hulled oil tankers. Like Exxon Valdez, Capital One should have had more protection. Like the oil companies of old, the bank may have also lacked a culture of safety sufficiently strong to ensure that it relentlessly probed for new vulnerabilities. Both are a reminder that, if data are now more valuable than oil, data breaches bear an unhealthy resemblance to oil spills. Internet firms can learn a lesson or two from hoary old carbon-belchers like ExxonMobil on how to avoid them.

Exxon Valdez was a watershed moment for Exxon. In 1989 it had already been around for a century. But the disaster led to a full-blown overhaul of the firm’s safety and risk-management culture. In “Private Empire”, a book about ExxonMobil by Steve Coll, the author can barely disguise his astonishment at how far this went. In its offices, desk drawers had to be kept shut lest employees bump into them. Every meeting began with a “safety minute”, akin to a blessing before a meal. Cuts by office paper clips were monitored. Even today its 11-point Operations Integrity Management System—as detailed in its pursuit of safety nirvana as the Buddhist path to enlightenment—is drilled into new recruits, incorporated into performance assessments and shared with contractors and suppliers. For 27 years it has worked remarkably well.

Corporations can argue that data are trickier to manage than oil. Preventing data breaches is a fiendish game of cat-and-mouse. Companies do not know who their attackers are—criminals? state actors? lone wolves?—or what they want. The hacker only has to be right once to penetrate a system. Defenders have to parry every jab, all the time; one misstep and they lose. Many companies bridle at being held responsible for being the victims of crime or acts of war.

Still, the oil industry’s experience is instructive. First, the emphasis on ingraining safety in every employee can strengthen the weakest link in cyber-security: the individual. In “The Fifth Domain” Mr Knake and Richard Clarke argue that companies deploying ever more sophisticated anti-hacking technology cannot eliminate “Poor Dave”, the guy in every organisation who can’t resist a phishing email. Studies show that employees are often, by accident or intentionally, the main cause of successful cyber-attacks. Wise firms fake phishing emails to flush out the Daves.

Oil firms’ insistence on their supply chains speaking the same language, and loudly, on safety is also worth emulating. Hackers increasingly infiltrate large corporations by first penetrating the defences of smaller suppliers and piggybacking on the communications systems which link the two. This is made easier by the fact that many firms treat hacks like gonorrhoea, an embarrassing affliction no one wants to admit even if speaking about it would stop its spread. Some call it a tragedy of the cyber-commons.

Third, the near-death experience suffered by BP after the Deepwater Horizon oil disaster in 2010 shows how data can turn from an asset into a crushing liability. It ended up costing the British firm more than $50bn. Its reputation has yet to recover fully.

For now, the costs of a data breach look absurdly light by comparison. Capital One says its recent hack will cost it up to $150m this year, mainly in extra customer support. Ignoring potential fines, that is less than $1.50 per victim—and a tenth of the bank’s latest quarterly profits. Equifax, a credit-scoring firm, recently agreed to pay up to $700m to resolve lawsuits and other claims after data of nearly 150m clients were hacked. IBM Security, a consultancy, puts the average cost of a data breach worldwide at $150 per victim. Messrs Knake and Clarke think it should be more like $1,000 to spur the investment needed to prevent losses.
Tar and feathers

Governments are indeed getting tougher. Last month Britain’s proposed fining British Airways £183m ($222m) after data about 500,000 passengers were stolen. That marks the first big penalty linked to the EU’s newish data-protection rules. The airline said it would appeal. It may yet convince regulators it is not to blame. But as with Exxon or BP, that argument may wear thin with regulators and consumers. Companies which trade in data—ie, most big ones these days—had better get ahead of the problem.